===== PAGE 1 =====
IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026 5507016
SpectralZero: Text-Driven Spectral–Spatial
Alignment for Zero-Shot Hyperspectral
Image Classification
Yang Xia , Xia Yue , Xuanzhi Liu , Ning Chen , Hui Liu , Jun Yue , Member, IEEE,
and Leyuan Fang , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Recently, deep learning-based hyperspectral image classificationtasks,exhibitingsuperiorrecognitionaccuracyand
(HSI) classification methods have witnessed significant advance- generalizationperformance.Thecodewillbeavailableathttps://
ments. However, existing approaches predominantly focus on github.com/xiayang124/SpectralZero
feature modeling for seen classes during the training phase,
Index Terms—Cross-modal alignment, hyperspectral image
whiletheexplorationofgeneralizationandtransfermechanisms
(HSI) classification, zero-shot classification.
toward unseen land-cover categories remains limited. As a
result,thesemethodsexhibitpooradaptabilityandgeneralization NOMENCLATURE
performanceinzero-shotscenarios.Toaddressthischallenge,we
propose a novel zero-shot HSI classification framework called
D HSI dataset D with image I and label
SpectralZero that leverages the strong generalization capabil-
ity of large language models (LLMs) to compensate for the set L.
absence of semantic information in unseen classes. Moreover, I HSI I ∈RH×W×C.
our framework explicitly captures the synergistic relationship H Height of the HSI.
between spatial and spectral features to facilitate knowledge
W Width of the HSI.
transfer from seen to unseen categories. Specifically, the pro-
C Number of spectral bands.
posed framework comprises two key modules: semantic prompt
enrichment (SPE) and spectral–spatial union extraction (SSUE).
LN Setofallclasslabels,LN ={l1,l2,...,lN}.
SPEutilizesLLMstogeneratefine-grainedsemanticdescriptions p Patch size; each patch is of size p×p.
of land-cover classes, mitigating the semantic representation IP Image patch cropped from I, IP ∈
deficiency caused by the lack of samples in unseen categories. Rp×p×C.
SSUE introduces two separate branches to independently model
S Seen classes.
spatialstructuresandspectralreflectancecharacteristics,thereby
enhancing the model’s capacity to extract joint spatial–spectral U Unseen classes.
representations. A major advantage of our method lies in its IP HSI patch from the seen classes subset.
S
ability to accurately classify unseen classes without requiring IP HSIpatchfromtheunseenclassessubset.
U
any samples during training or inference. Experiments on DP Patch-level dataset constructed from D,
multiple public HSI datasets demonstrate that our approach
DP ={IP,L}.
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods in zero-shot
DP Seen classes subset, DP ={IP,LK}.
S S S S
Received2November2025;revised10January2026;accepted25February DP Unseen classes subset, DP ={IP,LM}.
U U U U
2026. Date of publication 2 March 2026; date of current version 12 March K Number of seen classes.
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
M Number of unseen classes.
Foundation of China under Grant 62505008, Grant 62425109, and Grant
U22B2014; in part by the Science and Technology Plan Project Fund of LK Label set of seen classes, LK =
S S
HunanProvinceunderGrant2022RSC3064;andinpartbyHunanProvincial {l1,l2,...,lK}.
NaturalScienceFoundationofChinaunderGrant2025JJ40059.(YangXiaand LM L S abe S l set S of unseen classes, LM =
XiaYuecontributedequallytothiswork.)(Correspondingauthor:NingChen.) U U
Yang Xia and Xuanzhi Liu are with the Department of Geomatics Engi- {l1,l2,...,lM}.
U U U
neering,ChangshaUniversityofScienceandTechnology,Changsha410114, f Pretrained CLIP text encoder.
t
China(e-mail:xiayang0302@gmail.com;lxz031125@gmail.com).
ot Textual semantic feature extracted by f.
XiaYueiswiththeSchoolofComputerScienceandEngineering,Central t
SouthUniversity,Changsha410083,China(e-mail:yuexia486@gmail.com). ospe Spectral feature extracted by the spectral
Ning Chen is with the Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographic branch.
Information System, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China (e-mail:
ospa Spatial feature extracted by the spatial
chenning0115@pku.edu.cn).
HuiLiuiswiththeSchoolofRemoteSensingandGeomaticsEngineering, branch in SSUE.
NanjingUniversityofInformationScienceandTechnology,Nanjing210044, Sspe Spectral cross-modal embedding space.
China(e-mail:huil@pku.edu.cn).
Sspa Spatial cross-modal embedding space.
Jun Yue is with the School of Automation, Central South University,
Changsha410083,China(e-mail:junyue@csu.edu.cn). Mspe Similarity matrix in the spectral embed-
Leyuan Fang is with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, ding space.
Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China, and also with the Peng Cheng
Mspa Similarity matrix in the spatial
Laboratory,Shenzhen518000,China(e-mail:fangleyuan@gmail.com).
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/TGRS.2026.3669516 embedding space.
1558-0644©2026IEEE.Allrightsreserved,includingrightsfortextanddatamining,andtrainingofartificialintelligenceand
similartechnologies.Personaluseispermitted,butrepublication/redistributionrequiresIEEEpermission.
Seehttps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.htmlformoreinformation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 2 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
M Unified similarity matrix after weighted or even complete absence of labeled samples for certain
fusion of Mspe and Mspa. classes [11]. Moreover, surface variations induced by geo-
M jth similarity score in the denominator logical activities or biological evolution, though effectively
j
of (3). captured by sensors, are difficult to annotate continuously
oi Spectral–spatial joint feature. due to the high labor demands of long-term manual labeling,
pcls Confidence (probability) vector for seen thereby exacerbating the emergence of zero-shot scenarios. In
class prediction. such cases, traditional classification models often struggle to
ospe p Projected spectral feature in the accuratelymodelthefeaturerepresentationsofunseenclasses,
spectral–text space. leading to their misclassification as known categories and
ospa p Projectedspatialfeatureinthespatial–text significantly impairing overall classification performance and
space. generalization. Consequently, developing HSI classification
ot p Projected text feature in the alignment methods that are robust under limited-sample or even zero-
space. shot conditions has become an urgent and critical research
W Spectral projection matrix. challenge.
spe
W Spatial projection matrix. To alleviate the issue of high annotation costs, researchers
spa
W Text projection matrix. haveproposedseverallimited-sampleHSIclassificationmeth-
t
ods. The goal of limited-sample classification is to achieve
considerable classification performance but relying solely on
I. INTRODUCTION
very limited labeled HSI samples (e.g., as few as ten samples
HYPERSPECTRAL images (HSI) offer rich spectral and per class for training). Liu et al. [12] constructed a 3D-CNN
spatialinformation,providingsuperiordiscriminationof toextractHSIfeaturesandlearnametricspace,andcombined
land-covertypescomparedtotraditionalmultispectralorRGB it with a nearest-neighbor classifier at the testing stage to
imagery [1]. Their continuous high-resolution spectral bands perform HSI classification, achieving significant performance
enable effective differentiation of visually similar classes, improvement in limited-sample scenarios. To mitigate the risk
such as synthetic and natural grass, improving classification of model overfitting under limited data conditions, Xue et al.
accuracy and reliability. HSI classification facilitates joint [13] proposed a more lightweight network architecture and
spectral–spatialfeaturerepresentation,supportingapplications introduced positive and negative samples across different
like water body classification [2], plant monitoring [3], and scales to enhance the generalization capability of the model.
mineral identification [4]. However, the high dimensionality Moreover, considering that natural images (such as ImageNet
of HSI poses significant challenges for feature extraction and [14]) possess substantially richer labeled data compared to
classification, making efficient utilization of such data a key HSI, Li et al. [15] first pretrained a general spatial feature
research focus. extractionnetworkusingnaturalimages,subsequentlytraining
Early HSI classification methods primarily relied on man- a dedicated spectral classification branch with limited HSI
ually designed spectral–spatial feature extraction techniques, samples. Nevertheless, these methods remain inadequate for
employing classical machine learning algorithms such as effectively addressing situations in which certain categories
support vector machines (SVMs) [5], random forests (RFs) are entirely absent from the training labels.
[6], and K-nearest neighbors (K-NNs) [7]. However, these In recent years, zero-shot classification—originally intro-
approaches,constrainedbyexpertheuristics,oftenfailtoyield duced in [16] to recognize unseen categories via language-
optimal representations. With the advent of deep learning, based attributes—has garnered increasing attention. In this
neural networks have shown a remarkable capacity for auto- paradigm,thelabelspacesoftrainingandtestingaremutually
mated feature learning, significantly advancing classification exclusive, where the seen classes represent the categories
performance. Chen et al. [8] introduced a 3-D convolutional available during training and the unseen classes denote novel
neural network (3D-CNN) to jointly exploit spectral and categories that have never been observed by the model
spatial information, achieving superior results. Zhong et al. but can be inferred through learned semantic relationships.
[9] enhanced model stability and expressiveness through Mainstream approaches leverage image–text datasets such
deeper architectures and residual connections. More recently, as ImageNet [14], CUB [17], and AwA [18], projecting
Hong et al. [10] adopted the transformer’s global atten- visual and textual features into a shared semantic space to
tion mechanism to model long-range spectral dependencies, enablecross-modalalignment.Representativemethodsinclude
effectively addressing the locality limitations of conven- semantic output codes [19], which map images into seman-
tionalconvolutionalmodelsandfurtherboostingclassification tic embeddings for nearest-neighbor classification, and deep
accuracy. learning-based approaches [20], [21] that exploit large-scale
Despite the significant progress achieved in HSI classifica- data to learn complex semantic relations. Generative models
tion, existing models still heavily rely on large amounts of suchasGAN-basedframeworks[22]furtherimprovegeneral-
labeled data for training and evaluation. In practical applica- ization by synthesizing features for unseen classes. However,
tions, a single HSI scene often covers extensive geographic thesemodelsoftenrelyonlimitedtrainingdataandsmall-scale
areas and contains diverse and complex land-cover types. architectures, constraining their semantic modeling capacity.
The prohibitively high cost of manual annotation renders With advances in GPU computing and the rise of large-
comprehensive labeling infeasible, resulting in severe scarcity scale pretrained models, traditional datasets are increasingly
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 3 =====
XIAetal.:SpectralZero:TEXT-DRIVENSPECTRAL–SPATIALALIGNMENT 5507016
inadequate.Toaddressthis,CLIP[23]wasproposed,leverag-
ing large-scale web-sourced image–text pairs and contrastive
learning to construct a unified semantic space, which has
since been extended to tasks like semantic segmentation [24],
image generation [25], [26], point cloud classification [27],
andanomalydetection[28].Nonetheless,theseapproachesare
primarily developed for RGB imagery and lack the capacity
to capture rich spectral features in HSI, limiting their gener-
alization in such domains.
Several early efforts have explored zero-shot classification
in HSI. Yue et al. [31] proposed a spectral–spatial recon-
struction method to enhance discrimination between seen and
unseen classes. However, this approach treats all unseen cat-
egories as a single group, lacking fine-grained differentiation.
Pang et al. [32] introduced a CLIP-based pseudo-labeling
framework that mitigates noise through augmentation and
refinement, improving stability without requiring manual
annotation. Yet its exploitation of textual semantics remains
limited, constraining visual-semantic representation learning.
To further exploit the semantic transfer capability inherent in
textual information, Zhang et al. [30] proposed using textual
descriptionsasauxiliaryinformationtofacilitateclassification
capability transfer between different datasets. Although this
approach effectively leverages side information, it still relies Fig. 1. Difference among three models. (a) Prompt learning-based zero-
on class labels during training and is restricted to scenarios shotclassification(suchasHyperFree[29]),whichstillrequiresclass-related
samplesaspromptsfortesting;(b)domaingeneralization(see[30]),whichis
whereclassesacrossdatasetsareidentical,makingitchalleng-
conductedwithinthesamedatasetandcategorysettings;and(c)text-guidance
ing to extend to zero-shot classification settings. To overcome zero-shot classification (ours), where the train and test classes are disjoint,
dataset-specific training dependencies, Li et al. [29] devel- and the model identifies different land-cover categories through cross-class
knowledgetransfer.
opedHyperFree,whichutilizesaspectral-widedictionaryand
minimal prompts to generalize across HSI datasets. Despite
its effectiveness, HyperFree still depends on class-specific decoupled spectral feature extraction pathway, where global
promptsatinference,thusfailingtoidentifyunseencategories spatial pooling suppresses structural interference, and dual
in strict zero-shot settings. A comparison of these approaches projectionspacescomputeimage–textsimilaritymatricesfrom
has been shown in Fig. 1. In summary, the current research spatialandspectralfeaturesindependently.Thesearefusedvia
on zero-shot classification of HSI remains at an exploratory proportional weighting to form a unified similarity matrix for
stage and faces several notable limitations. contrastivelearning,therebyimprovingcross-modalalignment
1) MostmainstreamZSCmethodsareprimarilytrainedon and unseen class classification. Together, the SPE module and
RGBimagery,failingtofullymodelandexploittherich SSUE module synergistically strengthen the model’s capacity
spectral information inherent to HSIs, thereby limiting for semantic modeling and spectral representation, facilitating
theirgeneralizationcapabilityinhyperspectralscenarios. robust generalization to novel categories.
2) Existing HSI-ZSC models (see [32]) exhibit 1) This article proposes a novel HSI classification frame-
inadequate integration and utilization of auxiliary work called SpectralZero tailored for zero-shot sce-
information—such as textual semantics or class narios. By leveraging the generalization capability of
attribute descriptions—thus, underutilizing the potential large language models (LLMs), the framework effec-
ofsemanticknowledgeinenhancingclassdiscrimination tively addresses the information deficiency of unseen
and knowledge transfer. classes. Furthermore, it exploits spatial–spectral fea-
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, this article pro- tures to facilitate knowledge transfer from seen to
poses a novel framework for HSI zero-shot classification, unseencategories.Experimentalresultsonmultiplepub-
termed semantic-driven spectral–spatial alignment (Spec- licly available datasets demonstrate that the proposed
tralZero).SpectralZeroenableseffectiverecognitionofunseen framework outperforms existing zero-shot classification
land-cover categories by leveraging labeled samples from methods,validatingitseffectivenessandgeneralizability.
seen classes and associated auxiliary semantics, addressing 2) An SPE module is introduced to generate fine-grained
limitations due to data scarcity or annotation costs. The semantic descriptions of land-cover classes based on
framework comprises two key components: the semantic LLMs, mitigating the lack of visual information for
prompt enrichment (SPE) module and the spectral–spatial unseen categories. In addition, the module embeds
union extraction (SSUE) module. SPE module enriches cat- auxiliary semantic information into a unified semantic
egory representations with visual attribute descriptions to space via the CLIP model, thereby constructing implicit
enhance semantic generalization. SSUE module introduces a semantic associations between seen and unseen classes.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 4 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
Fig.2. FrameworkoftheproposedSpectralZero.TheSPEmoduleencodesrichnaturallanguagedescriptionsintosemanticfeaturesandprojectstheminto
bothspatialandspectralembeddingspaces.TheSSUEmoduledecouplesimagefeaturesintospatialandspectralcomponents,whicharethenalignedwith
the corresponding semantic features. The similarity matrices from the two aligned spaces are fused and used to compute the loss during training. During
testing,classificationisperformedbyselectingtheclassindexcorrespondingtothemaximumvalueinthefusedsimilaritymatrix.
This significantly enhances the model’s capacity for the image, and C is the number of spectral bands. The set of
semantic modeling and recognition, providing critical labels is denoted as LN = {l1,l2,...,lN}. To facilitate model
support for zero-shot classification tasks. trainingandevaluation,weextractimagepatchesofsize p×p
3) An SSUE module is designed to improve the model’s centered on specific pixels from image I in dataset D, and
abilitytoextractspatialandspectralfeaturesunderzero- associate them with corresponding class labels to construct
shotconditions.Themoduleconsistsoftwoindependent a subset DP = {IP,L}, where IP ∈ Rp×p×C. According to
branches: a spatial branch for capturing structural infor- the zero-shot classification setting, the subset DP is further
mation of land covers, and a spectral branch for divided into seen classes subset DP = {IP,LK} and unseen
S S S
explicitly modeling the rich reflectance characteristics classes subset DP = {IP,LM}, where S and U denote the
U U U
inherent in hyperspectral data. These features are then seen and unseen classes, K and M denote the number of
deeply fused to generate a unified embedding capa- seen and unseen classes, respectively. Each sample from seen
ble of jointly expressing spatial and spectral attributes, classes subset contains an image patch IP ∈ Rp×p×C, a
S
such as color and material properties, thereby signifi- label set LK = {l1,l2,...,lK} ∈ LN. The construction of the
S S S S
cantlyenhancingclassificationperformanceinzero-shot unseen class subset is similar to that of the seen classes,
scenarios. including image patches IP ∈ Rp×p×C, the unseen label set
U
LM ={l1,l2,...,lM}∈LN.
U U U U
II. METHODOLOGY This article focuses on the strict zero-shot classification
setting, where the label sets of seen and unseen classes are
Thissectionpresentstheoverallarchitectureoftheproposed
disjoint and satisfying
SpectralZeroframeworkandprovidesadetaileddescriptionof
its two core components: SPE module and SSUE module. In
LK ∩LM =∅. (1)
addition,SectionII-Dfurtherelaboratesontheimplementation S U
details of the model. The overall pipeline of SpectralZero is
The goal of strict zero-shot classification is to ensure that
illustrated in Fig. 2.
no unseen class samples participate in training. Under this
constraint, only the seen class subset DP is used as training
S
A. Overview data to learn a mapping function
Given an HSI dataset D = {I,L}, where I ∈ RH×W×C
denotes an HSI, H and W represent the height and width of f :IP →IP (2)
S U
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 5 =====
XIAetal.:SpectralZero:TEXT-DRIVENSPECTRAL–SPATIALALIGNMENT 5507016
TABLEI matrix is then optimized via the InfoNCE loss function [33].
HYPERPARAMETERDEFINITIONS The formula of the InfoNCE loss is defined as follows:
exp(M/τ)
L =−log (3)
InfoNCE PB
exp
(cid:0)
M /τ
(cid:1)
j=1 j
where τ is a learnable temperature parameter that controls the
smoothness of the contrast during training and B is the batch
size.
During the testing phase, the semantic-enhanced texts and
HSI data from the unseen class dataset are, respectively, fed
into the SPE module and the SSUE module to obtain the
corresponding text features and dual-branch spectral–spatial
features. These three features are then aligned to generate a
fused similarity matrix, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). The model
determinesthepredictedclassofeachsamplebyselectingthe
indexofthemaximumvalueineachrowofthefusedsimilarity
matrix,therebycompletingthezero-shotclassificationtaskfor
HSI.
B. SPE Module
This section introduces the SPE module, which expands
Fig.3. Similaritymatrixoftheproposedmodelinboththetrainingandtesting class labels into attribute-level natural language descriptions
stages. (a) Training stage. The features from the two different modalities with scale-consistent cues to enhance textual expressiveness
are aligned using cosine similarity to generate a similarity matrix. Higher
similaritycorrespondstoadarkercolorinthematrix.(b)Testingstage.The for cross-modal alignment. Specifically, taking the IP dataset,
similaritymatrixisgeneratedinthesamemannerasinthetrainingstage,and we first define multiple visual attribute dimensions for every
prediction results are obtained by selecting the indices corresponding to the class, including shape (e.g., land surface), object type (e.g.,
maximumvalues.
crop type), and color (represent spectral information, e.g.,
vegetation color), and provide relevant visual descriptions for
such that the function f enables accurate classification on the eachattribute.Fine-grainedclassdescriptionsaregeneratedby
unseen subset DP. For clarity, we summarize key notations a pretrained LLM using a fixed prompt template and no post-
U
and hyperparameters in Nomenclature and Table I. processing (e.g., cleaning or filtering) and no manual curation
First, the proposed SpectralZero framework consists of two areapplied.Foreachdataset,weusethesameprompttemplate
main stages: training and testing. During the training stage, to ensure consistent semantic generation across classes and
the class name and corresponding HSI data IP from the datasets. Then, using a class-prepending strategy, the class
S
seen classes are input into the SPE module and the SSUE nameiscombinedwitheachvisualattributedescriptionwhich
module, respectively. Specifically, the SPE module leverages are listed in Table II to generate a comprehensive SPE text
the rich knowledge and contextual reasoning capability of T that systematically conveys attribute-level class semantics,
pretrained LLMs, guided by in-context prompts, to automati- the prompting template and the attribute processing flow are
cally generate semantically enhanced textual descriptions that shown in Fig. 4.
provide richer visual-semantic expressions than the original To enhance the expressive ability of semantic prompts
class names. Subsequently, these semantic-enhanced texts are and ensure the accuracy and richness of the generated texts
fed into the pretrained CLIP text encoder f to accurately in capturing visual attributes of land-cover categories, SPE
t
extract textual semantic features ot with stronger discrimina- further utilizes a pretrained LLM to automatically generate
tivecapability.Meanwhile,theSSUEmoduleinitiallyextracts fine-grained attribute descriptions covering multiple visual
featuresfromtheHSIpatch,andtheresultinglow-dimensional dimensions,suchascolor,shape,material,andstructure,based
features are separated into spectral and spatial branches. Each on class names and in-context prompts. Importantly, the text
branchindependentlyperforms1-Dspectralfeatureextraction generation for seen and unseen classes uses only the class
and spatial feature extraction with auxiliary classification, names and dataset-agnostic domain knowledge, and does not
outputting spectral features ospe and spatial features ospa, access any pixels, masks, statistics, geographic metadata, or
respectively. Subsequently, the extracted spatial features ospa image-derived cues from the target datasets. Thus, no visual
and spectral features ospe are jointly input into the image or dataset-specific information from unseen classes is leaked
projection to align with textual semantic features ot, thereby into training. This strategy not only significantly expands the
constructing two cross-modal embedding spaces, Sspa and semantic representation capacity of textual prompts but also
Sspe. These visual projections are matched with text semantic establishesmorepreciseanddiscriminativedistinctionsamong
projections ot to generate two similarity matrices, Mspa and classes within the semantic embedding space. By leveraging
Mspe, as depicted in Fig. 3(a). Finally, a weighted fusion this semantic enrichment mechanism, the generated textual
strategy is applied to combine these two similarity matrices descriptions achieve higher quality alignment with visual fea-
into a unified similarity matrix M. This unified similarity tures in the semantic space, thereby effectively enhancing the
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 6 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
TABLEII
VISUALATTRIBUTEDESCRIPTIONS(IPDATASETFOREXAMPLE)
output features are inherently entangled in terms of spatial
informationandspectralresponses.Whensuchentangledrep-
resentations are directly projected into a unified cross-modal
embedding space, variations in spatial context may interfere
with spectral semantics, resulting in semantic misalignment
andreduceddiscriminabilityofcross-modalalignment.Mean-
while, this coupling makes it difficult to explicitly and
controllably adjust the relative contributions of spatial and
spectral information during alignment. Therefore, we pro-
pose the SSUE module to decouple the initial features and
separately extract spatial information and spectral response
characteristics, providing a more controllable representational
basis for subsequent alignment and fusion. The proposed
module comprises four subcomponents: a preliminary image
Fig.4. Semanticenhancementtextgenerationworkflow.Wefirstprovidethe encoder, a 1-D spectral extraction branch, a spatial extrac-
LLMwithapromptcontainingkeytermsandaskittogenerateattribute-level tion and classification branch, and a dual-branch alignment
descriptions, such as shape, color, and vegetation category. These attributes
similarity-weighted fusion mechanism.
arethenconcatenatedwithapredefinedtemplatetoformanenrichedsemantic
prompt,whichissubsequentlyfedintotheCLIPtextencodertoobtainreliable The preliminary image encoder is adopted from [30], com-
textualfeaturerepresentations. prising multiple 3-D convolutional blocks designed to extract
spectral–spatial joint features oi from input images. However,
model’sunderstandingofimagecontentanditsdiscriminative this representation inherently mixes spatial and spectral infor-
performance in zero-shot scenarios. Fig. 5 further illustrates mation, adversely affecting the precise extraction of image
theprocessbywhichthemodeltransfersknowledgefromseen spectral features. Thus, we introduce a single-dimensional
to unseen classes through linguistic information. spectral extraction branch (SSEB) within the SSUE module,
Topreciselycapturethevisual-semanticinformationembed- aiming to reduce interference from spatial image features
dedintheSPEtext,wefurtherintroducetheCLIPtextencoder and enhance the spectral extraction capability of the model.
which is frozen to encode the enriched descriptions. The Specifically, this spectral extraction branch initially performs
CLIPmodel,trainedonlarge-scaleimage–textpairs,possesses dimensionality reduction on preliminary features oi (extracted
strong capabilities in textual understanding and semantic rep- by the preliminary image encoder) through a 3D-CNN layer,
resentation. By leveraging the pretrained CLIP text encoder, generatingintermediatefeatureswithdimensionsC(cid:48)×H(cid:48)×W(cid:48).
the model can extract accurate and discriminative textual Subsequently, global pooling is applied to aggregate these
semantic features. Subsequently, the extracted textual features intermediate features along spatial dimensions into a 1-D
are projected by a mapping head into two separate cross- spectral feature vector ospe. Next, the spectral vector under-
modal embedding spaces within SSUE. These embeddings goes feature refinement through 1D-CNN layers to extract
are then aligned with the spatial and spectral features of the local spectral features, followed by additional BN layers for
image, respectively, to enable feature alignment and cross- capturing nonlinear spectral characteristics. Finally, the resul-
modal classification. tant spectral features ospe are projected into the spatial–text
cross-modalunionembeddingspaceSspeforsubsequentcross-
C. Spectral–Spatial Union Feature Extraction Module modal alignment and similarity-weighted fusion.
Although the preliminary 3D-CNN demonstrates strong Concurrently, to effectively extract and classify spatial fea-
capability in learning spectral–spatial joint representations, its tures, the spectral–spatial joint features oi obtained by the
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 7 =====
XIAetal.:SpectralZero:TEXT-DRIVENSPECTRAL–SPATIALALIGNMENT 5507016
Fig.5. Visualizationoftheprojectionspacewherevisualandtextfeaturesarealigned.Visualfeaturesandtextualfeaturesaremappedintoasharedprojection
space. Within this space, green shapes represent visual information and orange shapes denote textual information, with different geometric shapes used to
distinguishdifferentcategories.Themappedseenandunseenclassessharevisualandtextualsemanticinformation,whichservesasanchorsforknowledge
transfer.Meanwhile,underthealignmentconstraints,visualandtextualfeaturesfromthesamecategorymaintainhighsimilarity,whereasvisualfeaturesare
pushedawayfromtextualfeaturesofdifferentcategories.
preliminary image encoder are flattened into a 1-D feature spectral–textsimilaritymatrixMspe andspatial–textsimilarity
vectoroi.Thisvectoristhensimultaneouslyprocessedthrough matrixMspa arecomputed.Tofurtherfusespectralandspatial
two parallel pathways as follows. information, we employ a proportional weighting strategy to
1) It is input to a fully connected classifier layer, yielding combine these two matrices into a fused similarity matrix M
a class confidence vector pcls for seen classes. Cross- M=(1−λ )·sim (cid:0) ospa p,ot p(cid:1) +λ ·sim (cid:0) ospe p,ot p(cid:1) .
sim sim
entropy loss L is employed with ground-truth labels
CE (6)
for supervised training to facilitate optimization of the
The resulting fused similarity matrix M is subsequently uti-
preliminary image encoder.
lizedtocomputetheInfoNCE[33]lossformodeloptimization
2) Thevectorisprojectedintothespatial–textcross-modal
duringtraining.Here,λ isatunablehyperparametertermed
union embedding space Sspa, thus, supporting sub- the spectral similarity f s u im sion coefficient, with a value range
sequent cross-modal feature alignment and similarity-
of λ ∈[0,1]. sim(·) denotes the cosine similarity operation
sim
weighted fusion.
used to measure similarity between two vectors. In the above,
In the dual-branch similarity-weighted fusion mechanism, ospa p andospe p denotethespatialandspectralfeaturesafter
the model simultaneously extracts image and textual features, projection,respectively,andot p denotestheprojectedtextual
ultimately obtaining multimodal representations composed of features.Finally,theInfoNCElossiscombinedwiththecross-
spectral, spatial, and textual semantic features. The spectral entropylossthroughweightedsummation,yieldingtheoverall
featuresandtextualsemanticfeaturesareprojectedintoauni- loss function
fied spectral–text cross-modal alignment space via projection
L =λ ·L +(1−λ )·L (7)
transformations total loss CE loss InfoNCE
ospe p =W ·ospe where λ loss is a hyperparameter controlling the loss weight,
spe termed the loss fusion coefficient, with a value range of
ot p =W ·ot (4)
t λ ∈[0,1]. This parameter dynamically balances supervised
loss
where ospe p and ot p represent the projected spectral and classification learning and contrastive learning during the
text features, respectively, and W and W are the corre- training process.
spe t
sponding projection matrices for spectral and textual features.
Similarly, spatial features and text features are projected into D. Implementation
the spatial–text cross-modal alignment space as follows: To clearly illustrate the training implementation process of
ospa p =W ·ospa the proposed model, Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode for
spa
thecompletetrainingprocedureofthemodelcomposedofthe
ot p =W ·ot (5)
t SPEmoduleandSSUEmodule.IntheSPEmodule,themodel
where ospa p denotes the projected spatial features, and W performs preliminary encoding of the image and separately
spa
represents the spatial feature projection matrix. These two extracts spectral and spatial features. The spectral features
cross-modal spaces separately enable high-level alignment are encoded and projected through an independent branch,
between HSI and text in the spectral and spatial dimen- while the spatial features are utilized both for generating aux-
sions. After completing cross-modal feature alignment, the iliaryclassificationsignalsandforspatial-semanticalignment.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 8 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
Algorithm 1 SpectralZero With SPE Module and SSUE seen class for training, while all samples from unseen classes
Module are used for testing. To ensure a fair and comprehensive
Input: Training datasets DP =˚ IP,LM(cid:9) evaluation, we adopt random rotation for the unseen classes
S S S
Output: Trained model across folds and then keep the resulting splits fixed for all
1: for all sample-pair (i s ,l s ) in D S P do experiments, such that each class is treated as unseen exactly
2: // SSUE module once.
3: // Extract initial visual feature a) Indian Pines: The IP dataset was collected by the
4: oi ←visualEncoder(i s ) AVIRISsensorin1992.ItconsistsofanHSIofsize145×145
5: // Extract spectral feature with 224 spectral bands, covering the electromagnetic spec-
6: ospe ←singleSpectralExtract(oi) trum from 0.4 to 2.5 µm. Since some bands are located in
7: // Extract spatial feature and classification signal water absorption regions, 24 bands (104–108, 150–163, and
8: (ospa,pcls)←spatialFeatureExtract(oi) 220) were removed following standard practice, resulting in
9: // Auxiliary classification signal 200effectivebands.Theimagemainlycoversagriculturaland
10: L CE ←crossEntropyLoss(pcls,l s ) vegetation areas, with approximately two-thirds consisting of
11: ospa p ←spatialProjectionHead(oi) crop-related land covers and the remaining one-third predom-
12: ospe p ←spectralProjectionHead(ospe) inantly forests or mixed vegetation. A total of 16 classes are
13: included, such as “Woods” and “Grass Trees.” We selected
14: // SPE module 13 classes for the training set, while the remaining three
15: t s ←generateEnrichmentText(Name,Attributes) classes were designated as the test set. The false-color image
16: ot ←CLIPTextEncoder(t s ) and class labels are shown in Fig. 6.
17: ot p ←textProjectionHead(ot) // Text projection b) Houston 2013: The Houston dataset is one of the
18: benchmark datasets utilized in our study. It was acquired by
19: // Alignment (spatial–text and spectral-text) the ITRES CASI-1500 sensor in 2013 over the University of
20: Mspa ←cosineSimilarity(ot p,ospa p) Houston campus and its surrounding areas, comprising 144
21: Mspe ←cosineSimilarity(ot p,ospe p) spectral bands ranging from 0.38 to 1.05 µm. The image
22: dimension is 349×1905 pixels with a spatial resolution of
23: // Similarity fusion 2.5 m. This dataset primarily represents typical urban land-
24: M ←(1−λ sim )Mspa+λ sim Mspe cover types, with 15 annotated classes, including “Highway”
25: L InfoNCE ←InfoNCELoss(M) and “Commercial.” We selected 12 classes as the training set,
26: // Fusion loss and the remaining three classes were reserved for the test set.
27: L total ←λ loss L CE +(1−λ loss )L InfoNCE Thefalse-colorimageandclasslabelsareillustratedinFig.7.
28: c) WHU-Hi-LongKou [34], [35]: The WHHL dataset
29: // Update was acquired in 2018 over Longkou Town, Hubei Province,
30: L total .backward() China,usingaHeadwallNano-Hyperspechyperspectralimag-
31: update(model.parameter) ing system mounted on an uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV)
32: end for platform at approximately 500-m altitude. The collected
images underwent radiometric calibration and geometric
correction, ensuring good physical consistency and spatial
The SSUE module extracts semantic features using a frozen
accuracy. The WHHL image consists of 270 spectral bands
CLIP text encoder and maps them into a unified semantic
covering a range from 0.4 to 1.0 µm, with dimensions of
space for dual-path alignment with the image features. Based
550×400 pixels and a spatial resolution of 0.463 m. This
on this, two similarity matrices are constructed and fused
datasetpredominantlycoversagriculturalareas,annotatedwith
via weighted combination, and the model is optimized for
9 typical land-cover classes such as “Rice” and “Cotton.” We
image–text alignment capability using the InfoNCE [33] loss,
selected six classes for the training set, while the remaining
whiletheauxiliaryclassificationsignalissimultaneouslyfused
three classes were used for testing. The false-color image and
for end-to-end training. This implementation process provides
class labels are depicted in Fig. 8.
a unified training foundation for subsequent experimental
2) Evaluation Metrics: To comprehensively evaluate the
settings and multimodel comparisons. The specific hyperpa-
model’s performance on zero-shot classification, four stan-
rameter configurations will be further detailed in Section III.
dard metrics are employed: overall accuracy (OA), average
accuracy (AA), Kappa coefficient, per-class accuracy, and
III. EXPERIMENTS
coefficientofvariation(CV).OAquantifiesthemodel’sgener-
A. Experimental Settings
alizationbycomputingtheratioofcorrectlypredictedsamples
1) Datasets: We conducted experiments on three public tothetotalnumberofunseenclasssamples.Per-classaccuracy
datasets to validate the effectiveness of our model capacity in assessesclass-specificrecognitionbymeasuringtheproportion
HSI classification: the Indian Pines (IP) dataset, the Houston of correct predictions within each class, while AA reflects
2013 (Houston) dataset, and the WHU-Hi-LongKou (WHHL) overall class-wise balance by averaging per-class accuracy
[34], [35] dataset. Dataset configurations are summarized in across all categories. The Kappa coefficient further evaluates
Table III, we randomly select 20% of the samples from each the statistical consistency between predicted and true labels,
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 9 =====
XIAetal.:SpectralZero:TEXT-DRIVENSPECTRAL–SPATIALALIGNMENT 5507016
TABLEIII
SETTINGSFORTHEIP,HOUSTON,ANDWHHLDATASETS(TRAINON20%OFSEENCLASSES;THREE
UNSEENCLASSESPERFOLDFORTESTING,NONOVERLAPPINGROTATIONS)
Fig.6. False-colorimageanditscorrespondingground-truthmapoftheIP
dataset.
effectivelyaccountingforchanceagreementandenhancingthe
Fig. 7. False-color image and its corresponding ground-truth map of the
robustness of performance evaluation. To further demonstrate Houstondataset.
the stability of our model, we evaluate potential per-class bias
using the CV. CV is defined as the ratio between the standard
deviation and the mean of the per-class accuracies, which can
be expressed as
σ
CV= (8)
µ
where σ and µ denote the standard deviation and mean of
the per-class accuracies, respectively. A lower CV implies
more balanced per-class performance, indicating better model
stability.
3) TrainingDetails: SpectralZeroisimplementedbasedon
the PyTorch framework. The experiments are conducted on
Fig. 8. False-color image and its corresponding ground-truth map of the
a machine equipped with an Intel1 Xeon1 Platinum 8352V
WHHLdataset.
CPU@2.10 GHz and a 24-GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090
GPU, with 90 GB of system memory. We use GPT-4 as the
LLM to generate SPE texts. rate, number of training epochs, optimizer selection, and the
4) Parameter Setting: In this section, we describe sev- temperature coefficient used in contrastive loss. To balance
eral hyperparameter settings that have a relatively minor training efficiency with memory constraints, the batch size is
impact on model performance, including batch size, learning uniformly set to 1024 and the train sample is set to 20% for
all datasets. Based on the characteristics of each dataset, we
1Registeredtrademark. adopt different initial learning rates: 0.0001 for IP, 0.0002 for
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 10 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
TABLEIV
ZERO-SHOTCLASSIFICATIONRESULTSOFEXPERIMENTSONTHEIPDATASET
Houston, and 0.00002 for WHHL. Regarding training epochs, the generator and combines them with seen class sam-
the maximum number of epochs is set to 100 for IP, 150 for ples to train a downstream classifier, thereby enabling
Houston, and 50 for WHHL. The model is evaluated every recognition of unseen categories.
10epochsforIPandHouston,andevery5epochsforWHHL. 2) APN [37] achieves zero-shot classification by aligning
Since the final performance is selected as the best among local image features with class attribute features, while
all evaluation points, minor adjustments to the number of also leveraging global image feature information for
epochs have a negligible influence on the final results. We final discrimination.
employ the AdamW optimizer [36] across all datasets, which 3) CE-GZSL [38] proposes a hybrid generalized zero-shot
decouples weight decay from the gradient-based parameter classification framework that integrates feature genera-
updates, thereby improving model generalization. The tem- tion with discriminative embedding. By mapping both
perature coefficient in the contrastive loss remains learnable real and synthesized samples into a contrastive embed-
throughouttrainingandisinitializedto0.1forIPandHouston ding space and combining class-level and instance-level
and to 0.17 for WHHL. To further improve model robustness, supervision, the model enhances classification perfor-
we apply flip augmentation and random noise augmentation mance. Given that the original implementation supports
toalldatasetsduringtraining.Forpatchconstruction,inorder the ZSC setting, we train and evaluate this model
to enhance feature extraction quality, we set the patch size to under the strict zero-shot classification configuration for
15, 11, and 13 for IP, Houston, and WHHL, respectively. comparison.
4) ACMR[39]modelsthedatadistributionbyconstructing
both visual VAEs and textual VAEs, and introduces an
B. Performance Analysis
IEM module to prevent latent space collapse and to
In our comparative experiments, we include not only enhance cross-modal information integration between
traditional zero-shot classification models but also sev- visual and textual modalities.
eral representative methods specifically designed for HSI 5) TheSPECIAL[32]modelhasbeendetailedinSectionI.
zero-shot classification. The selected baselines include: AsthemostrecentlyproposedmethodforHSIzero-shot
f-CLSWGAN [22], APN [37], CE-GZSL [38], ACMR [39], classification, it demonstrates significant advantages in
and SPECIAL [32]. both performance and methodological design, making it
1) f-CLSWGAN [22] as a representative approach in the a strong baseline for comparison.
field of zero-shot classification, f-CLSWGAN jointly
trains a feature generator and a discriminator, incor- To ensure a fair comparison, all methods are evaluated
porating an auxiliary classification loss to enhance the with the same SPE text as input; unless otherwise noted, all
discriminability of the generated features. Ultimately, remaining hyperparameters and implementation details follow
thismethodsynthesizesfeaturesforunseenclassesusing thebest-performingsettingsreportedintheirrespectivepapers.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 11 =====
XIAetal.:SpectralZero:TEXT-DRIVENSPECTRAL–SPATIALALIGNMENT 5507016
TABLEV
ZERO-SHOTCLASSIFICATIONRESULTSOFEXPERIMENTSONTHEHOUSTONDATASET
TABLEVI
ZERO-SHOTCLASSIFICATIONRESULTSOFEXPERIMENTSONTHEWHHLDATASET
Tables IV–VI present the experimental results of the pro- in scenarios with fewer training samples (such as IP and
posed method and several existing zero-shot classification Houston), which may be due to its high dependency on
models on three HSI datasets: IP, Houston, and WHHL. The data scale; however, its performance improves on the WHHL
evaluation metrics include OA, AA, per-class classification dataset, where more training samples are available. Overall,
results, and the Kappa coefficient. the proposed method outperforms the second-best mod-
As shown in Tables IV–VI, SpectralZero achieves the els by 23.34% (APN), 12.72% (APN), and 6.71% (APN)
best zero-shot classification overall performance on all three in OA on the IP, Houston, and WHHL datasets, respec-
datasets. Among the baseline methods, APN demonstrates tively. For the AA, our method achieves improvements of
stable performance across multiple categories, achieving par- 32.64% (APN), 20.00% (APN), and 12.79% (f-CLSWGAN)
ticularly high OA and AA on the three datasets. On the over the respective second-best models on the IP, Hous-
contrary, CE-GZSL, ACMR, and SPECIAL exhibit certain ton, and WHHL datasets, fully demonstrating the signifi-
limitations in classification performance for most cate- cant advantage of our method in zero-shot generalization
gories. The f-CLSWGAN model performs less competitively capability.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 12 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
Fig. 10. Confusion matrices of the proposed model on (a) IP, (b) Houston,
and (c) WHHL datasets. The rows denote the ground-truth classes and the
columnsdenotethepredictedclasses.Thematricesareshownincountform:
diagonalentriesindicatethenumberofcorrectlyclassifiedsamplesforeach
class,whileoff-diagonalentriesindicatethenumberofsamplesmisclassified
intootherclasses,reflectinginterclassconfusion.Darkercolorsindicatehigher
values. This confusion matrix is computed from the first split in the three-
class rotation protocol for each dataset and is provided to visually illustrate
typicalconfusionpatterns.
Fig. 9. CV across models on three datasets. Lower values on the y-axis
indicategreaterrobustness.
To rigorously assess class-level bias and robustness across
Furthermore,basedontheper-classresultsinTablesIV–VI, datasets, we adopt the CV, which has been defined as in
we analyze the class-level performance across different (8), as a stability metric to quantify per-class classification
datasets.OntheIPdataset,ourmethodachieveshighrecogni- accuracy,theresultsareshowninFig.9.Acrossmostsettings,
tionaccuracyformostclasses,e.g.,99.84%forCornNotilland our method attains lower CV values on all three datasets,
100.00% for Corn. Nevertheless, a few classes exhibit notable indicating more stable and less biased per-class performance.
failures, such as 0.00% accuracy for StoneSteTow in Group 3 In summary, the proposed model enhances the perception
and0.00%forAlfalfainGroup4.Thisphenomenonismainly of spectral differences between categories by independently
attributedtotherelativelylimitednumberofeffectivesamples extracting spectral information from mixed features and con-
for these classes (fewer than 20), as well as pronounced structing a semantic alignment pathway, complemented by
intraclassvariationsinfine-grainedspectral–spatialrepresenta- fine-grained textual descriptions. For categories with highly
tions for Alfalfa and Stone Steel Tower, which can destabilize similarspatialstructures(e.g.,“wheat”and“oats”),theability
classprototypesandtheprojectedfeaturedistribution,thereby to model spectral information enables more accurate dif-
weakening the discriminability of cross-modal alignment. ferentiation; for categories that rely on color and spectral
On the Houston dataset, the performance shows a more descriptions (e.g., “HayWindrowed”), semantic prompt texts
pronounceddivergenceinclassdifficulty.Ontheonehand,our further strengthen the model’s understanding and representa-
methodperformsstronglyonclasseswithrelativelyconsistent tion of spectral-semantic features, thereby improving overall
materialresponsesandclearspatialstructures,suchashealthy classification performance.
grass and highway, both reaching 100.00%, indicating that To further analyze the classification capability of the pro-
these classes are more likely to form stable and alignable posed model for each category, Fig. 10 presents the confusion
cross-modal semantic anchors. On the other hand, under matrices of our method on the three datasets. As can be
complex urban scenarios, some classes remain challenging observedfromthefigure,mostclassificationresultsarehighly
and even suffer extreme failures—for example, commercial concentrated along the main diagonal, indicating that the
achieves only 36.53%, and soil drops to 0.20%. This is fun- model can accurately distinguish between different classes
damentally due to stronger intraclass heterogeneity and more in each dataset and achieves strong overall classification
severe background mixing effects for these classes. Taking performance. Meanwhile, the number of misclassifications
Soil as an example, it is often interwoven with bare land, in the off-diagonal regions of the confusion matrices is
construction areas, or road-edge materials, leading to mixed relatively small, demonstrating that the model still main-
spectralresponsesandoverlapwithotherhard-surfaceclasses, tains good discriminative ability when dealing with classes
which substantially increases the discrimination difficulty. that have similar spectral characteristics or spatial struc-
OntheWHHLdataset,theper-classresultsalsorevealclear tures. These results validate the effectiveness and robustness
class-wise disparities. Our method attains high accuracy on of our approach in complex scenarios, and further confirm
classes such as water and corn, while broad-leaf soybean, the generalization capability of the model under zero-shot
mixed weed, and roads and house exhibit evident failures. settings.
This behavior is closely related to their spatial distribution
patterns: these difficult classes often appear as narrow strip-
C. Model Analysis
like regions or boundary-transition areas and are tightly
adjacent to neighboring land-cover types, making patch-level 1) Ablation Study: To further evaluate the effectiveness
representations more susceptible to surrounding background of incorporating spectral information and semantic prompt-
interference, which in turn induces misclassifications and enhanced texts in the similarity fusion weighting, we design
exacerbates interclass confusion. several ablation experiment scenarios as follows.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 13 =====
XIAetal.:SpectralZero:TEXT-DRIVENSPECTRAL–SPATIALALIGNMENT 5507016
TABLEVII
ABLATIONSTUDYRESULTS(%)ONTHEIPDATASETS,HOUSTONDATASETS,ANDWHHLDATASETSWITHALLCLASSESUNDERZERO-SHOTSETTINGS
1) Setting 1: Only baseline model, with no spectral–text
cross-modal alignment space and no SSEB for feature
extraction.
2) Setting 2 (Ablation of SPE Module): Replace the SPE
text with the original class name. This setting is used
to evaluate the contribution of rich textual prompts in
representing visual features.
3) Setting 3 (Ablation of SSUE Module): Set similarity
fusion coefficient λ to 0. This setting is used to
sim
analyzethecontributionofthespectralfeatureextraction
capability in the SSUE module to model performance.
4) Setting 4: Full SpectralZero model.
The results of the ablation experiments are shown in Fig. 11. Experimental results on the three datasets under different spectral
similarityfusioncoefficients.
Table VII. Based on these results, the following conclusions
can be drawn.
1) Comparing the Setting 4 with the Setting 2, we observe
improvements in OA of 2.93%, 3.32%, and 1.60%, and
improvements in AA of 0.69%, 4.38%, and 0.80% on
theIP,Houston,andWHHLdatasets,respectively.These
resultsdemonstratethatsemanticprompt-enhancedtexts
playasignificantroleinimprovingthemodel’sabilityto
expressthevisualcharacteristicsofland-covertypesand
effectively facilitate semantic alignment between image
and text features.
2) Comparing the Setting 4 with the Setting 3, OA is
improvedby0.63%,3.32%,and2.09%,AAisimproved
by 0.43%, 2.03%, and 4.36% on the IP, Houston,
Fig.12. Experimentalresultsonthethreedatasetsunderdifferentlossfusion
and WHHL datasets, respectively. Overall, these results
weights.
validate the effectiveness of the SSUE module in con-
structing semantic alignment in the spectral dimension,
which is particularly evident in datasets with high spec- 1) Spectral Similarity Fusion Coefficient λ : This coeffi-
sim
tral discriminability. cientisusedtoadjustthelinearfusionratiobetweenthe
3) Compared with Setting 1, Setting 4 achieves significant spectral–text similarity matrix Sspe and the spatial–text
performance improvements on all three datasets, with similaritymatrixSspa,withλ ∈[0,1].Toevaluatethe
sim
OA improvements of 3.99%(IP), 3.73% (Houston), and impact of this hyperparameter on model performance,
2.86% (WHHL), and AA improvements of 4.55% (IP), wesetλ tosevenvalues:[0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1]
sim
3.36% (Houston), and 4.50% (WHHL). These results for ablation analysis, while keeping other parameters
fully demonstrate that the proposed dual-branch align- at their optimal configurations to eliminate confound-
mentsimilarityweightingfusionstrategycaneffectively
ing factors. As shown in Fig. 11, according to the
enhance the model’s discriminative power and general- experimental results, the model achieves optimal clas-
izationperformanceinHSIzero-shotclassificationtasks. sificationperformanceatλ valuesof0.2,0.5,and0.6
sim
2) HyperparameterAnalysis: Thissectionpresentsananal- on the Houston, IP, and WHHL datasets, respectively.
ysisofseveralkeyhyperparametersthathaveacriticalimpact This result indicates that the fusion weighting of cross-
on the experimental results of the model, including the simi- modalsimilarityhasasignificantimpactonthemodel’s
larity fusion coefficient, the number of training samples, and performance, and that the optimal value differs across
the loss weights. datasets.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 14 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
TABLEVIII
HYPERPARAMETERSETTINGSFORSSUE
2) Loss Fusion Weight λ : This parameter is used to model’s recognition ability for unseen classes. To achieve
loss
adjust the linear weighting ratio between the InfoNCE effectivetransferofsemanticknowledge,weintroducetheSPE
loss and the auxiliary loss (cross-entropy loss) in the module, which extends the original class labels into natural
totallossfunction.Bytuningthevalueofλ ,itispos- language descriptions with visual attributes. These serve as
loss
sible to balance the contributions of different loss terms semanticanchorsfortransfer,effectivelybridgingthesemantic
and prevent one loss term from dominating the opti- gapbetweentextualandimagefeatures,andprovidingamore
mization process, thereby suppressing the optimization application-oriented mode of expression. To jointly model
effect of other supervisory signals. To analyze the effect the spectral and spatial features of images, we design the
of this parameter on model performance, we set λ SSUE module, which explicitly decouples spectral features
loss
to six values [0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1] for analysis. The frommixedfeaturesforindependentextractionandprojection,
experimental results are shown in Fig. 12. According while utilizing spatial features for auxiliary classification and
to the results, the model achieves optimal performance alignment. The two types of visual features are mapped into
at λ values of 0.4, 0.4, and 1 on the Houston, IP, two independent embedding spaces and aligned with seman-
loss
andWHHLdatasets,respectively.Theseresultsindicate tic features. Finally, a linear weighted fusion of similarity
that the coordination between different loss terms has matrices guides the cross-modal contrastive learning process.
a significant impact on both the training efficiency and Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed frame-
final performance of the model. work achieves superior classification performance compared
3) Other Parameters: In addition to the main hyperpa- to existing methods on three publicly available HSI datasets,
rameter settings, several structural parameters are also verifying its effectiveness and generalizability.
configured in the model implementation, which are In future work, we will further explore more practical
provided in Table VIII, including the kernel size for settings, such as extending the model to the generalized
3D convolution, the use of bias terms, and the stride zero-shot classification task in real-world scenarios where
settings for max-pooling operations. On the Houston land-cover boundaries are ambiguous and unseen classes are
dataset,the3Dconvolutionkernelsize issetto(3,1,1) unpredictable. We will also focus on improving cross-dataset
with corresponding padding of (1, 0, 0), and bias terms generalization to better meet the transferability requirements
are enabled during training. For both the IP and WHHL of HSI applications.
datasets,aunifiedkernelsizeof(3,3,3)andpaddingof
(1,1,1)areadopted.Regardingmax-poolingoperations,
REFERENCES
a pooling stride of (1, 2, 2) is used for the Houston
dataset to preserve more spectral information, while a [1] Z.Ai,H.Luo,andJ.Wang,“Alightweightmultistreamframeworkfor
salientobjectdetectioninopticalremotesensing,”IEEETrans.Geosci.
stride of (4, 2, 2) is used for the IP and WHHL datasets
RemoteSens.,vol.63,2025,Art.no.5617915.
to further compress the spatial dimension and improve [2] X. Luo, H. Xie, X. Tong, and H. Pan, “A water extraction method
processingefficiency.Finally,projectiondimdenotesthe basedonairbornehyperspectralimagesinhighlycomplexurbanarea,”
inProc.Int.WorkshopRemoteSens.Intell.Process.(RSIP),May2017,
output dimensionality of the projection heads that map
pp.1–4.
the spectral and spatial branch features into the shared [3] R. Rayhana, Z. Ma, Z. Liu, G. Xiao, Y. Ruan, and J. S. Sangha, “A
embedding space, which is set to 768 for all datasets. review on plant disease detection using hyperspectral imaging,” IEEE
Trans.AgriFoodElectron.,vol.1,no.2,pp.108–134,Dec.2023.
[4] G.Notesco,E.BenDor,andA.Brook,“MineralmappingofMakhtesh
RamoninIsraelusinghyperspectralremotesensingdayandnightLWIR
IV. CONCLUSION
images,” in Proc. 6th Workshop Hyperspectral Image Signal Process.,
Evol.RemoteSens.(WHISPERS),Jun.2014,pp.1–4.
ThisarticleproposesanHSIclassificationmethodforzero-
[5] F. Melgani and L. Bruzzone, “Classification of hyperspectral remote
shot classification which called SpectralZero, aiming to fully sensing images with support vector machines,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
exploit the semantic information in HSI and enhance the RemoteSens.,vol.42,no.8,pp.1778–1790,Aug.2004.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 15 =====
XIAetal.:SpectralZero:TEXT-DRIVENSPECTRAL–SPATIALALIGNMENT 5507016
[6] J.Ham,Y.Chen,M.M.Crawford,andJ.Ghosh,“Investigationofthe [28] J.Jeong,Y.Zou,T.Kim,D.Zhang,A.Ravichandran,andO.Dabeer,
randomforestframeworkforclassificationofhyperspectraldata,”IEEE “WinCLIP:Zero-/few-shotanomalyclassificationandsegmentation,”in
Trans.Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.43,no.3,pp.492–501,Mar.2005. Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
[7] X. Jia and J. A. Richards, “Cluster-space classification: A fast 2023,pp.19606–19616.
K-nearest neighbour classification for remote sensing hyperspectral [29] J. Li et al., “HyperFree: A channel-adaptive and tuning-free foun-
data,”inProc.IEEEWorkshopAdv.Techn.Anal.RemotelySensedData, dation model for hyperspectral remote sensing imagery,” in Proc.
Oct.2003,pp.407–410. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025,
[8] Y.Chen,H.Jiang,C.Li,X.Jia,andP.Ghamisi,“Deepfeatureextrac- pp.23048–23058.
tion and classification of hyperspectral images based on convolutional [30] Y. Zhang, M. Zhang, W. Li, S. Wang, and R. Tao, “Language-aware
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol.54, no.10, domain generalization network for cross-scene hyperspectral image
pp.6232–6251,Oct.2016. classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol.61, 2023, Art.
[9] Z. Zhong, J. Li, Z. Luo, and M. Chapman, “Spectral–spatial residual no.5501312.
network for hyperspectral image classification: A 3-D deep learn- [31] J. Yue, L. Fang, and M. He, “Spectral–spatial latent reconstruction
ing framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol.56, no.2, for open-set hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Image
pp.847–858,Feb.2018. Process.,vol.31,pp.5227–5241,2022.
[10] D.Hongetal.,“SpectralFormer:Rethinkinghyperspectralimageclassi- [32] L. Pang, J. Yao, K. Li, J. Zhou, D. Meng, and X. Cao,
ficationwithtransformers,”IEEETrans.Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.60, “SPECIAL: Zero-shot hyperspectral image classification with CLIP,”
2022,Art.no.5518615. 2025,arXiv:2501.16222.
[11] X. Yue, A. Liu, N. Chen, S. Xia, J. Yue, and L. Fang, “HyperMLL: [33] A.vandenOord,Y.Li,andO.Vinyals,“Representationlearningwith
Towardrobusthyperspectralimageclassificationwithmultisourcelabel contrastivepredictivecoding,”2018,arXiv:1807.03748.
learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol.62, 2024, Art. no. [34] Y.Zhong,X.Hu,C.Luo,X.Wang,J.Zhao,andL.Zhang,“WHU-hi:
5526515. UAV-borne hyperspectral with high spatial resolution (H2) benchmark
[12] B.Liu,X.Yu,A.Yu,P.Zhang,G.Wan,andR.Wang,“Deepfew-shot datasetsandclassifierforprecisecropidentificationbasedondeepcon-
learning for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. volutionalneuralnetworkwithCRF,”RemoteSens.Environ.,vol.250,
RemoteSens.,vol.57,no.4,pp.2290–2304,Apr.2019. Dec.2020,Art.no.112012.
[13] Z.Xue,Y.Zhou,andP.Du,“S3Net:Spectral–spatialSiamesenetwork [35] Y.Zhongetal.,“Mini-UAV-bornehyperspectralremotesensing:From
for few-shot hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. observationandprocessingtoapplications,”IEEEGeosci.RemoteSens.
RemoteSens.,vol.60,2022,Art.no.5531219. Mag.,vol.6,no.4,pp.46–62,Dec.2018.
[36] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
[14] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei,
inProc.Int.Conf.Learn.Represent.(ICLR),2017.
“ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2009, [37] W.Xu,Y.Xian,J.Wang,B.Schiele,andZ.Akata,“Attributeprototype
networkforzero-shotlearning,”inProc.Adv.NeuralInf.Process.Syst.,
pp.248–255.
2020,pp.21969–21980.
[15] Z. Li et al., “Few-shot hyperspectral image classification with self-
[38] Z. Han, Z. Fu, S. Chen, and J. Yang, “Contrastive embedding for
supervisedlearning,”IEEETrans.Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.61,2023,
generalizedzero-shotlearning,”inProc.IEEE/CVFConf.Comput.Vis.
Art.no.5517917.
PatternRecognit.(CVPR),Jun.2021,pp.2371–2381.
[16] C. H. Lampert, H. Nickisch, and S. Harmeling, “Learning to
[39] Z. Fang, X. Zhu, C. Yang, Z. Han, J. Qin, and X.-C. Yin,
detect unseen object classes by between-class attribute transfer,”
“Learningalignedcross-modalrepresentationforgeneralizedzero-shot
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009,
classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), Jun. 2022,
pp.951–958.
pp.6605–6613.
[17] C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie,
“Thecaltech-UCSDbirds-200–2011dataset,”CaliforniaInst.Technol.,
Pasadena,CA,USA,Tech.Rep.CNS-TR-2011-001,2011.
[18] Y. Xian, C. H. Lampert, B. Schiele, and Z. Akata, “Zero-shot
learning—A comprehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and
the ugly,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol.41, no.9,
pp.2251–2265,Sep.2019.
[19] M.Palatuccietal.,“Zero-shotlearningwithsemanticoutputcodes,”in Yang Xia was born in Hubei, China, in 2003.
Proc.22ndInt.Conf.NeuralInf.Process.Syst.,Vancouver,BC,Canada: He received the bachelor’s degree in surveying
CurranAssociates,2009,pp.1410–1418. and mapping engineering from the Department of
[20] J.L.Ba,K.Swersky,S.Fidler,andR.Salakhutdinov,“Predictingdeep Geomatics Engineering, School of Transportation,
zero-shot convolutional neural networks using textual descriptions,” in Changsha University of Science and Technology,
Proc.IEEEInt.Conf.Comput.Vis.(ICCV).Santiago,Chile:IEEE,Dec. Changsha, China, in 2025, where he is currently
2015,pp.4247–4255. pursuingthemaster’sdegreeinphotogrammetryand
[21] R.Socher,M.Ganjoo,C.D.Manning,A.Y.Ng,M.C.D.,andN.A.Y., remote sensing with the Department of Surveying
“Zero-shot learning through cross-modal transfer,” in Proc. Int. Conf. and Mapping Science and Technology, School of
NeuralInf.Process.Syst.,vol.26,2013,pp.935–943. AeronauticEngineering.
[22] Y. Xian, T. Lorenz, B. Schiele, and Z. Akata, “Feature generating Hisresearchinterestsencompasscomputervision,
networks for zero-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. machine learning, HSI classification, few-shot learning, and zero-shot
Vis.PatternRecognit.,Jun.2018,pp.5542–5551. learning.
[23] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
languagesupervision,”inProc.Int.Conf.Mach.Learn.,vol.139,2021,
pp.8748–8763.
[24] T.LuddeckeandA.Ecker,“Imagesegmentationusingtextandimage
prompts,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR),Jun.2022,pp.7076–7086.
[25] O. Patashnik, Z. Wu, E. Shechtman, D. Cohen-Or, and D. Lischin-
ski, “StyleCLIP: Text-driven manipulation of StyleGAN imagery,” XiaYuereceivedthebachelor’sdegreeincomputer
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, science from Central South University, Changsha,
pp.2065–2074. China,in2020,wheresheiscurrentlypursuingthe
[26] G. Kim, T. Kwon, and J. C. Ye, “DiffusionCLIP: Text-guided Ph.D.degreewiththeSchoolofComputerScience
diffusion models for robust image manipulation,” in Proc. andEngineering.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, Her research interests include machine learning,
pp.2416–2425. remotesensing,andHSIprocessing.
[27] R. Zhang et al., “PointCLIP: Point cloud understanding by CLIP,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2022,pp.8552–8562.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
===== PAGE 16 =====
5507016 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
Xuanzhi Liu was born in Hunan, China, in 2003. Jun Yue (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
He is currently pursuing the B.E. degree in remote degree ingeodesy fromWuhan University,Wuhan,
sensingscienceandtechnologywiththeDepartment China, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree in GIS from
ofGeomaticsEngineering,SchoolofTransportation, PekingUniversity,Beijing,China,in2018.
Changsha University of Science and Technology, He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Changsha,China. School of Automation, Central South University,
He has developed a strong interest in intelligent Changsha, China. His research interests include
image analysis and has been actively strengthen- satellite image understanding, pattern recognition,
ing his skills through coursework and independent andfew-shotlearning.
study. His research interests include computer Dr. Yue serves as a reviewer for IEEETRANS-
vision,machinelearning,HSIclassification,domain ACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, IEEE TRANS-
generalization,andzero-shotlearning. ACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, ISPRS Journal
ofPhotogrammetryandRemoteSensing, IEEEGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTE
SENSING LETTERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEER-
ING,InformationFusion,andInformationSciences.
Ning Chen received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
GIS from the School of Earth and Space Sciences,
PekingUniversity,Beijing,China,in2016and2019,
respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Engineer with the
Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographic Infor-
mation System, Peking University. His research
interests include satellite image understanding, rec-
ommendation systems, large-scale sparse learning,
andpatternrecognition.
Mr.ChenservesasareviewerforIEEETRANS-
ACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, IEEE GEOSCIENCE
ANDREMOTESENSINGLETTERS,andIEEESENSORSJOURNAL.
Leyuan Fang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
Hui Liu received the B.S. degree from the School the Ph.D. degree from the College of Electrical
of Mathematics and Statistics, Xidian University, and Information Engineering, Hunan University,
Xi’an, China, in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree from Changsha,China,in2015.
the Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographical From August 2016 to September 2017, he was
InformationSystems,SchoolofEarthandSpaceSci- a Post-Doctoral Researcher at the Department of
ences,PekingUniversity,Beijing,China,in2020. BiomedicalEngineering,DukeUniversity,Durham,
She was a Visiting Scholar at the Department NC, USA. He is currently a Professor with the
ofGeographyandGeoinformationScience,George School of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics,
Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA, from 2018 Hunan University. His research interests include
to 2019, and a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at sparserepresentationandmultiresolutionanalysisin
the Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographical remotesensingandmedicalimageprocessing.
Information Systems, Peking University, from 2020 to 2022. She is now Dr. Fang was a recipient of one Second-Grade National Award from the
a Lecturer and a Master Tutor with Nanjing University of Information NatureandScienceProgressofChinain2019.HeisanAssociateEditorof
Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. She is focusing on research about IEEETRANSACTIONSONIMAGEPROCESSING, IEEETRANSACTIONSON
spatiotemporal modeling, GIScience, deep learning, and its application in GEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING, IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURAL
remotesensingareas. NETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,andNeurocomputing.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NORTHWESTERN POLYTECHNICAL UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 28,2026 at 13:05:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.